gossip-protocol-spec.md, before:

# Gossip protocol

Solana nodes communicate with each other and share data using the gossip protocol. They send messages in a binary form which need to be deserialized. There are 6 types of messages:
* pull request
* pull response
* push message
* prune message
* ping
* pong

Each message contains data specific to its type: values that nodes share between them, filters, pruned nodes, etc. Nodes keep their data in _Cluster Replicated Data Store_ (`crds`), which is synchronized between nodes via pull requests, push messages and pull responses.

## Message format

Each message is sent in a binary form with a maximum size of 1232 bytes (1280 is a minimum `IPv6 TPU`, 40 bytes is the size of `IPv6` header and 8 bytes is the size of the fragment header). 


Data sent in the message is serialized from a `Protocol` type, which can be one of:

| Message                        | Data                      | Description |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------|------------|
| [pull request](#pullrequest)   | `CrdsFilter`, `CrdsValue` | sent by node to ask for new information |
| [pull response](#pullresponse) | `Pubkey`, `CrdsValuesList`   | response to a pull request |
| [push message](#pushmessage)   | `Pubkey`, `CrdsValuesList`     | sent by node to share its data |
| [prune message](#prunemessage) | `Pubkey`, `PruneData`     | sent to peers with a list of nodes which should be pruned |
| [ping message](#pingmessage)   | `Ping`                    | a ping message |
| [pong message](#pongmessage)   | `Pong`                    | response to a ping |

```mermaid
block-beta
    block
        columns 3
        block
            columns 1
            b["Pull request"]
            c["Pull response"]
            d["Push message"]
            e["Prune message"]
            f["Ping message"]
            g["Pong message"]
        end
        right<["Serialize"]>(right)
        a["Packet\n(1232 bytes)"]
    end
```

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

``` rust
enum Protocol
{
    PullRequest(CrdsFilter, CrdsValue),
    PullResponse(Pubkey, [CrdsValue]),
    PushMessage(Pubkey, [CrdsValue]),
    PruneMessage(Pubkey, PruneData),
    PingMessage(Ping),
    PongMessage(Pong)
}
```

</details>

### Type definitions
Fields described in the tables below have their types specified using Rust notation:
* `u8` - 1 byte of unsigned data (8-bit unsigned integer)
* `u16` - 16-bit unsigned integer
* `u32` - 32-bit unsigned integer, and so on...
* `[u8]` - dynamic size array of 1 byte elements
* `[u8; 32]` - fixed size array of 32 elements, with each element being 1 byte
* `[[u8; 64]]` - a two-dimensional array containing an arrays of 64 1-byte elements 
* `MyStruct` - a complex type (either defined as struct or a Rust enum), consisting of many elements of different basic types

The **Size** column in tables contains the size of data in bytes. The size of dynamic arrays contains an additional _plus_ (`+`) sign, e.g. `32+`, which means the array has at least 32 bytes. Empty dynamic arrays always have 8 bytes which is the size of array header containing array length. 
In case the size of a particular complex data is unknown it is marked with `?`. The limit, however, is always 1232 bytes for the whole data packet (payload within the UDP packet).

#### Data serialization
In the Rust implementation of the Solana node the data is serialized into a binary form using a [`bincode` crate][bincode] as follows:
* basic types, e.g. `u8`, `u16`, `u64`, etc. - are serialized as they are present in the memory, e.g. `u8` type is serialized as 1 byte, `u16` as 2 bytes, and so on,
* array elements are serialized as above, e.g. `[u8; 32]` array is serialized as 32 bytes, `[u16; 32]` will be 64 bytes,
* dynamically sized arrays have always an 8-byte header containing array length plus bytes of data, therefore empty arrays take 8 bytes,
* [enum types](#enum-types) contain a header with a 4-byte discriminant (tells which enum variant is selected) + additional data
* struct fields are serialized one bye one using the rules above.

##### Enum types
Enum types in Rust are more advanced than in other languages. Apart from _classic_ enum types, e.g.:
```rust
enum CompressionType {
    Gzip,
    Bzip2
}
```
it is also possible to create an enum which contains data fields, e.g.:
```rust
enum SomeEnum {
    Variant1(u64),
    Variant2(SomeType)
}

struct SomeType {
    x: u32,
    y: u16,
}
```
In the first case the serialized object of `CompressionType` enum will only contain 4-byte header with the discriminant value set to the selected variant (`0 = GZip`, `1 = Bzip2`). In the latter case apart from the header the serialized data will contain additional bytes according to which variant was selected: 
* `Variant1`: 8 bytes
* `Variant2`: 6 bytes (the sum of `x` and `y` fields of `SomeType` struct)

A special care need to be taken when deserializing such enum as according to the selected variant number of following data bytes may be different.


### PullRequest
A node sends it to ask the cluster for new information. It contains a bloom filter with things the node already has. Nodes receiving pull requests gather all new values from their `crds`, filter them using provided filters and send `PullResponse` to the origin of the request.

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `CrdsFilter` | [`CrdsFilter`](#crdsfilter) | 37+ | a bloom filter representing things node already has |
| `CrdsValue` | [`CrdsValue`](#data-shared-between-nodes) | ? | a value, usually a `LegacyContactInfo` of the node that sends the pull request containing node socket addresses for different protocols (gossip, tvu, tpu, rpc, etc.) |

#### CrdsFilter

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `filter` | [`Bloom`](#bloom) | 24+ | a bloom filter |
| `mask` | `u64` | 8 | filter mask |
| `mask_bits` | `u32` | 4 | filter mask bits |

#### Bloom
| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `keys` | `[u64]` | 8+ | keys |
| `bits` | `[u64]` | 8+ | bits |
| `num_bits_set` | `u64` | 8 | number of bits |

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

``` rust
struct CrdsFilter {
    filter: Bloom,
    mask: u64,
    mask_bits: u32,
}

struct Bloom {
    keys: Vec<u64>,
    bits: BitVec<u64>,
    num_bits_set: u64,
}
```

</details>

### PullResponse
These are sent in response to a `PullRequest`.

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `Pubkey` | `[u8; 32]` | 32 | a public key of the origin |
| `CrdsValuesList` | [`[CrdsValue]`](#data-shared-between-nodes) | 8+ | a list of new values  |



### PushMessage
It is sent by nodes who want to share information with others. Node receiving the message checks for:
- duplication - duplicated messages are dropped, and the node responds with a prune message if the message came from a low staked node
- new data:
    - new information is stored in `crds` and replaces old value
    - stores message in `pushed_once`, which is used for detecting duplicates
    - retransmits information to its peers
- expiration - messages older than `PUSH_MSG_TIMEOUT` are dropped

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `Pubkey` | `[u8; 32]` | 32 | a public key of the origin |
| `CrdsValuesList` | [`[CrdsValue]`](#data-shared-between-nodes) | 8+ | a list of values to share  |


## Data shared between nodes

The `CrdsValue` values that are sent in push messages, pull requests & pull responses contain the signature and the actual shared data:

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `signature` | `[u8; 64]` | 64 | signature of origin |
| `data` | [`CrdsData`](#crdsdata) | ? | data  |

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

```rust
struct CrdsValue {
    signature: Signature,
    data: CrdsData,
}

enum CrdsData {
    LegacyContactInfo(LegacyContactInfo),
    Vote(VoteIndex, Vote),
    LowestSlot(LowestSlotIndex, LowestSlot),
    EpochSlots(EpochSlotsIndex, EpochSlots),
    LegacyVersion(LegacyVersion),
    Version(Version),
    NodeInstance(NodeInstance),
    DuplicateShred(DuplicateShredIndex, DuplicateShred),
    SnapshotHashes(SnapshotHashes),
    ContactInfo(ContactInfo),
    RestartLastVotedForkSlots(RestartLastVotedForkSlots),
    RestartHeaviestFork(RestartHeaviestFork),
}
```
</details>

### CrdsData
The `CrdsData` is  an enum and can be one of:
* [LegacyContactInfo](#legacycontactinfo)
* [Vote](#vote)
* [LowestSlot](#lowestslot)
* LegacySnapshotHashes
* AccountsHashes
* EpochSlots
* LegacyVersion
* Version
* NodeInstance
* DuplicateShred
* SnapshotHashes
* ContactInfo
* RestartLastVotedForkSlots
* RestartHeaviestFork

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

```rust
enum CrdsData
{
    LegacyContactInfo(LegacyContactInfo),
    Vote(VoteIndex, Vote),
    LowestSlot(LowestSlotIndex, LowestSlot),
    LegacySnapshotHashes(LegacySnapshotHashes),
    AccountsHashes(AccountsHashes),
    EpochSlots(EpochSlotsIndex, EpochSlots),
    LegacyVersion(LegacyVersion),
    Version(Version),
    NodeInstance(NodeInstance),
    DuplicateShred(DuplicateShredIndex, DuplicateShred),
    SnapshotHashes(SnapshotHashes),
    ContactInfo(ContactInfo),
    RestartLastVotedForkSlots(RestartLastVotedForkSlots),
    RestartHeaviestFork(RestartHeaviestFork),
}
```
</details>

#### LegacyContactInfo
Basic info about the node. Nodes send this message to introduce themselves to the cluster and provide all addresses and ports that their peers can use to communicate with them. 

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `id` | `[u8; 32]` | 32 | public key of the origin |
| `gossip` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 |  gossip protocol address |
| `tvu` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | address to connect to for replication |
| `tvu_quic` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | TVU over QUIC protocol |
| `serve_repair_quic` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | repair service for QUIC protocol |
| `tpu` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | transactions address |
| `tpu_forwards` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | address to forward unprocessed transactions |
| `tpu_vote` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | address for sending votes |
| `rpc` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | address for JSON-RPC requests |
| `rpc_pubsub` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | websocket for JSON-RPC push notifications |
| `serve_repair` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | address for sending repair requests |
| `wallclock` | `u64` | 8 | wallclock of the node that generated that message |
| `shred_version` | `u16` | 2 | the shred version node has been configured to use |

##### SocketAddr
An enum which can be either V4 or V6 socket address.
| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `V4` | [`SocketAddrV4`](#socketaddrv4) | 10 | V4 socket address |
| `V6` | [`SocketAddrV6`](#socketaddrv6) | 22 | V6 socket address |

##### SocketAddrV4
| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `ip` | `[u8; 4]` | 4 | ip address |
| `port` | `u16` | 2 | port |

##### SocketAddrV6
| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `ip` | `[u8; 16]` | 16 | ip address |
| `port` | `u16` | 2 | port |

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

```rust
struct LegacyContactInfo {
    id: Pubkey,
    gossip: SocketAddr,
    tvu: SocketAddr,
    tvu_quic: SocketAddr,
    serve_repair_quic: SocketAddr,
    tpu: SocketAddr,
    tpu_forwards: SocketAddr,
    tpu_vote: SocketAddr,
    rpc: SocketAddr,
    rpc_pubsub: SocketAddr,
    serve_repair: SocketAddr,
    wallclock: u64,
    shred_version: u16,
}

enum SocketAddr {
    V4(SocketAddrV4),
    V6(SocketAddrV6)
}

struct SocketAddrV4 {
    ip: Ipv4Addr,
    port: u16,
}

struct SocketAddrV6 {
    ip: Ipv6Addr,
    port: u16
}

struct Ipv4Addr {
    octets: [u8; 4]
}

struct Ipv6Addr {
    octets: [u8; 16]
}
```

</details>

#### Vote
It's a validators vote on a fork. Contains a one byte index from vote tower (range 0 to 31) and vote transaction to execute by the leader.

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `index` | `u8` | 1 | vote tower index | 
| `from` | `[u8; 32]` | 32 | public key of the origin |
| `transaction`  | [`Transaction`](#transaction) | 59+ | a vote transaction, an atomically-committed sequence of instructions |
| `wallclock`  | `u64` | 8 |  wallclock of the node that generated that message |
| `slot`  | `u64` | 8 |  slot in which the vote was created |


##### Transaction
Contains a signature and a message with a sequence of instructions.

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `signature` | `[[u8; 64]]` | 8+ | list of signatures equal to `num_required_signatures` for the message |
| `message` | [`Message`](#message) | 51+ | transaction message containing instructions to invoke |



 ##### Message

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `header` | [`MessageHeader`](#message-header) | 3 | message header |
| `account_keys` | `[[u8; 32]]` | 8+ | all account keys used by this transaction |
| `recent_blockhash` | `[u8; 32]` | 32 |hash of a recent ledger entry |
| `instructions` | [`[CompiledInstruction]`](#compiled-instruction) | 8+ | list of compiled instructions to execute |

##### Message header

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `num_required_signatures` | `u8` | 1 | number of signatures required for this message to be considered valid |
| `num_readonly_signed_accounts` | `u8` | 1 | last `num_readonly_signed_accounts` of the signed keys are read-only accounts |
| `num_readonly_unsigned_accounts` | `u8` | 1 | last `num_readonly_unsigned_accounts` of the unsigned keys are read-only accounts |

##### Compiled instruction

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `program_id_index` | `u8` | 1 | index of the transaction keys array indicating the program account ID that executes the program |
| `accounts` |`[u8]` | 8+ | indices of the transaction keys array indicating the accounts that are passed to a program |
| `data` | `[u8]` | 8+ | program input data |

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

```rust
struct Vote {
    from: Pubkey,
    transaction: Transaction,
    wallclock: u64,
    slot: Option<Slot>,
}

type Slot = u64

struct Transaction {
    signature: Vec<Signature>,
    message: Message
}

struct Message {
    header: MessageHeader,
    account_keys: Vec<Pubkey>,
    recent_blockhash: Hash,
    instructions: Vec<CompiledInstruction>,
}

struct MessageHeader {
    num_required_signatures: u8,
    num_readonly_signed_accounts: u8,
    num_readonly_unsigned_accounts: u8,
}

struct CompiledInstruction {
    program_id_index: u8,
    accounts: Vec<u8>,
    data: Vec<u8>,
}
```
</details>

#### LowestSlot
It is the first available slot in Solana [blockstore][blockstore] that contains any data. Contains a one-byte index (deprecated) and the lowest slot number.

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `index` | `u8` | 1 | _deprecated_ | 
| `from` | `[u8; 32]`| 32 | public key of the origin |
| `root` | `u64` | 8 | _deprecated_ |
| `lowest` | `u64` | 8 | the actual slot |
| `slots` | `[u64]` | 8+ | _deprecated_ |
| `stash` | [`[EpochIncompleteSlots]`](#epochincompleteslots) | 8+ | _deprecated_ |
| `wallclock` | `u64` | 8 | wallclock of the node that generated that message |

##### EpochIncompleteSlots

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `first` | `u64` | 8 | first slot number | 
| `compression` | [`CompressionType`](#compressiontype) | 4 | compression type | 
| `compressed_list` | `[u8]` | 8+ | compressed slots list | 

##### CompressionType
Compression type enum.

| Data | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `Uncompressed` | uncompressed | 
| `GZip` | gzip | 
| `BZip2`| bzip2 | 

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

```rust
struct LowestSlot {
    from: Pubkey,
    root: Slot,
    lowest: Slot,
    slots: BTreeSet<Slot>,
    stash: Vec<EpochIncompleteSlots>,
    wallclock: u64,
}

struct EpochIncompleteSlots {
    first: Slot,
    compression: CompressionType,
    compressed_list: Vec<u8>,
}

enum CompressionType {
    Uncompressed,
    GZip,
    BZip2,
}
```
</details>


[bincode]: https://github.com/bincode-org/bincode/blob/trunk/docs/spec.md
[blockstore]: https://docs.solanalabs.com/validator/blockstore

Commit message:

docs: updated push message description based on feedback

gossip-protocol-spec.md, after:

# Gossip protocol

Solana nodes communicate with each other and share data using the gossip protocol. They send messages in a binary form which need to be deserialized. There are 6 types of messages:
* pull request
* pull response
* push message
* prune message
* ping
* pong

Each message contains data specific to its type: values that nodes share between them, filters, pruned nodes, etc. Nodes keep their data in _Cluster Replicated Data Store_ (`crds`), which is synchronized between nodes via pull requests, push messages and pull responses.

## Message format

Each message is sent in a binary form with a maximum size of 1232 bytes (1280 is a minimum `IPv6 TPU`, 40 bytes is the size of `IPv6` header and 8 bytes is the size of the fragment header). 


Data sent in the message is serialized from a `Protocol` type, which can be one of:

| Message                        | Data                      | Description |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------|------------|
| [pull request](#pullrequest)   | `CrdsFilter`, `CrdsValue` | sent by node to ask for new information |
| [pull response](#pullresponse) | `Pubkey`, `CrdsValuesList`   | response to a pull request |
| [push message](#pushmessage)   | `Pubkey`, `CrdsValuesList`     | sent by node to share its data |
| [prune message](#prunemessage) | `Pubkey`, `PruneData`     | sent to peers with a list of nodes which should be pruned |
| [ping message](#pingmessage)   | `Ping`                    | a ping message |
| [pong message](#pongmessage)   | `Pong`                    | response to a ping |

```mermaid
block-beta
    block
        columns 3
        block
            columns 1
            b["Pull request"]
            c["Pull response"]
            d["Push message"]
            e["Prune message"]
            f["Ping message"]
            g["Pong message"]
        end
        right<["Serialize"]>(right)
        a["Packet\n(1232 bytes)"]
    end
```

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

``` rust
enum Protocol
{
    PullRequest(CrdsFilter, CrdsValue),
    PullResponse(Pubkey, [CrdsValue]),
    PushMessage(Pubkey, [CrdsValue]),
    PruneMessage(Pubkey, PruneData),
    PingMessage(Ping),
    PongMessage(Pong)
}
```

</details>

### Type definitions
Fields described in the tables below have their types specified using Rust notation:
* `u8` - 1 byte of unsigned data (8-bit unsigned integer)
* `u16` - 16-bit unsigned integer
* `u32` - 32-bit unsigned integer, and so on...
* `[u8]` - dynamic size array of 1 byte elements
* `[u8; 32]` - fixed size array of 32 elements, with each element being 1 byte
* `[[u8; 64]]` - a two-dimensional array containing an arrays of 64 1-byte elements 
* `MyStruct` - a complex type (either defined as struct or a Rust enum), consisting of many elements of different basic types

The **Size** column in tables contains the size of data in bytes. The size of dynamic arrays contains an additional _plus_ (`+`) sign, e.g. `32+`, which means the array has at least 32 bytes. Empty dynamic arrays always have 8 bytes which is the size of array header containing array length. 
In case the size of a particular complex data is unknown it is marked with `?`. The limit, however, is always 1232 bytes for the whole data packet (payload within the UDP packet).

#### Data serialization
In the Rust implementation of the Solana node the data is serialized into a binary form using a [`bincode` crate][bincode] as follows:
* basic types, e.g. `u8`, `u16`, `u64`, etc. - are serialized as they are present in the memory, e.g. `u8` type is serialized as 1 byte, `u16` as 2 bytes, and so on,
* array elements are serialized as above, e.g. `[u8; 32]` array is serialized as 32 bytes, `[u16; 32]` will be 64 bytes,
* dynamically sized arrays have always an 8-byte header containing array length plus bytes of data, therefore empty arrays take 8 bytes,
* [enum types](#enum-types) contain a header with a 4-byte discriminant (tells which enum variant is selected) + additional data
* struct fields are serialized one bye one using the rules above.

##### Enum types
Enum types in Rust are more advanced than in other languages. Apart from _classic_ enum types, e.g.:
```rust
enum CompressionType {
    Gzip,
    Bzip2
}
```
it is also possible to create an enum which contains data fields, e.g.:
```rust
enum SomeEnum {
    Variant1(u64),
    Variant2(SomeType)
}

struct SomeType {
    x: u32,
    y: u16,
}
```
In the first case the serialized object of `CompressionType` enum will only contain 4-byte header with the discriminant value set to the selected variant (`0 = GZip`, `1 = Bzip2`). In the latter case apart from the header the serialized data will contain additional bytes according to which variant was selected: 
* `Variant1`: 8 bytes
* `Variant2`: 6 bytes (the sum of `x` and `y` fields of `SomeType` struct)

A special care need to be taken when deserializing such enum as according to the selected variant number of following data bytes may be different.

### PushMessage
It is sent by nodes who want to share information with others. Node receiving the message checks for:
- duplication - duplicated messages are dropped. Node responds with a prune message preiodically based on the nodes own stake, inbound peer stake and timeliness of the peer node
- new data:
    - new information is stored in `crds` and replaces old value
    - duplicates are tracked in `ReceivedCache`
    - retransmits information to its peers
- expiration - messages are dropped when older than `PUSH_MSG_TIMEOUT` and `crds` table fills up

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `Pubkey` | `[u8; 32]` | 32 | a public key of the origin |
| `CrdsValuesList` | [`[CrdsValue]`](#data-shared-between-nodes) | 8+ | a list of values to share  |


### PullRequest
A node sends it to ask the cluster for new information. It contains a bloom filter with things the node already has. Nodes receiving pull requests gather all new values from their `crds`, filter them using provided filters and send `PullResponse` to the origin of the request.

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `CrdsFilter` | [`CrdsFilter`](#crdsfilter) | 37+ | a bloom filter representing things node already has |
| `CrdsValue` | [`CrdsValue`](#data-shared-between-nodes) | ? | a value, usually a `LegacyContactInfo` of the node that sends the pull request containing node socket addresses for different protocols (gossip, tvu, tpu, rpc, etc.) |

#### CrdsFilter

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `filter` | [`Bloom`](#bloom) | 24+ | a bloom filter |
| `mask` | `u64` | 8 | filter mask |
| `mask_bits` | `u32` | 4 | filter mask bits |

#### Bloom
| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `keys` | `[u64]` | 8+ | keys |
| `bits` | `[u64]` | 8+ | bits |
| `num_bits_set` | `u64` | 8 | number of bits |

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

``` rust
struct CrdsFilter {
    filter: Bloom,
    mask: u64,
    mask_bits: u32,
}

struct Bloom {
    keys: Vec<u64>,
    bits: BitVec<u64>,
    num_bits_set: u64,
}
```

</details>

### PullResponse
These are sent in response to a `PullRequest`.

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `Pubkey` | `[u8; 32]` | 32 | a public key of the origin |
| `CrdsValuesList` | [`[CrdsValue]`](#data-shared-between-nodes) | 8+ | a list of new values  |



## Data shared between nodes

The `CrdsValue` values that are sent in push messages, pull requests & pull responses contain the signature and the actual shared data:

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `signature` | `[u8; 64]` | 64 | signature of origin |
| `data` | [`CrdsData`](#crdsdata) | ? | data  |

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

```rust
struct CrdsValue {
    signature: Signature,
    data: CrdsData,
}

enum CrdsData {
    LegacyContactInfo(LegacyContactInfo),
    Vote(VoteIndex, Vote),
    LowestSlot(LowestSlotIndex, LowestSlot),
    EpochSlots(EpochSlotsIndex, EpochSlots),
    LegacyVersion(LegacyVersion),
    Version(Version),
    NodeInstance(NodeInstance),
    DuplicateShred(DuplicateShredIndex, DuplicateShred),
    SnapshotHashes(SnapshotHashes),
    ContactInfo(ContactInfo),
    RestartLastVotedForkSlots(RestartLastVotedForkSlots),
    RestartHeaviestFork(RestartHeaviestFork),
}
```
</details>

### CrdsData
The `CrdsData` is  an enum and can be one of:
* [LegacyContactInfo](#legacycontactinfo)
* [Vote](#vote)
* [LowestSlot](#lowestslot)
* LegacySnapshotHashes
* AccountsHashes
* EpochSlots
* LegacyVersion
* Version
* NodeInstance
* DuplicateShred
* SnapshotHashes
* ContactInfo
* RestartLastVotedForkSlots
* RestartHeaviestFork

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

```rust
enum CrdsData
{
    LegacyContactInfo(LegacyContactInfo),
    Vote(VoteIndex, Vote),
    LowestSlot(LowestSlotIndex, LowestSlot),
    LegacySnapshotHashes(LegacySnapshotHashes),
    AccountsHashes(AccountsHashes),
    EpochSlots(EpochSlotsIndex, EpochSlots),
    LegacyVersion(LegacyVersion),
    Version(Version),
    NodeInstance(NodeInstance),
    DuplicateShred(DuplicateShredIndex, DuplicateShred),
    SnapshotHashes(SnapshotHashes),
    ContactInfo(ContactInfo),
    RestartLastVotedForkSlots(RestartLastVotedForkSlots),
    RestartHeaviestFork(RestartHeaviestFork),
}
```
</details>

#### LegacyContactInfo
Basic info about the node. Nodes send this message to introduce themselves to the cluster and provide all addresses and ports that their peers can use to communicate with them. 

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `id` | `[u8; 32]` | 32 | public key of the origin |
| `gossip` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 |  gossip protocol address |
| `tvu` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | address to connect to for replication |
| `tvu_quic` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | TVU over QUIC protocol |
| `serve_repair_quic` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | repair service for QUIC protocol |
| `tpu` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | transactions address |
| `tpu_forwards` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | address to forward unprocessed transactions |
| `tpu_vote` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | address for sending votes |
| `rpc` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | address for JSON-RPC requests |
| `rpc_pubsub` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | websocket for JSON-RPC push notifications |
| `serve_repair` | [`SocketAddr`](#socketaddr) | 10 or 22 | address for sending repair requests |
| `wallclock` | `u64` | 8 | wallclock of the node that generated that message |
| `shred_version` | `u16` | 2 | the shred version node has been configured to use |

##### SocketAddr
An enum which can be either V4 or V6 socket address.
| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `V4` | [`SocketAddrV4`](#socketaddrv4) | 10 | V4 socket address |
| `V6` | [`SocketAddrV6`](#socketaddrv6) | 22 | V6 socket address |

##### SocketAddrV4
| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `ip` | `[u8; 4]` | 4 | ip address |
| `port` | `u16` | 2 | port |

##### SocketAddrV6
| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `ip` | `[u8; 16]` | 16 | ip address |
| `port` | `u16` | 2 | port |

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

```rust
struct LegacyContactInfo {
    id: Pubkey,
    gossip: SocketAddr,
    tvu: SocketAddr,
    tvu_quic: SocketAddr,
    serve_repair_quic: SocketAddr,
    tpu: SocketAddr,
    tpu_forwards: SocketAddr,
    tpu_vote: SocketAddr,
    rpc: SocketAddr,
    rpc_pubsub: SocketAddr,
    serve_repair: SocketAddr,
    wallclock: u64,
    shred_version: u16,
}

enum SocketAddr {
    V4(SocketAddrV4),
    V6(SocketAddrV6)
}

struct SocketAddrV4 {
    ip: Ipv4Addr,
    port: u16,
}

struct SocketAddrV6 {
    ip: Ipv6Addr,
    port: u16
}

struct Ipv4Addr {
    octets: [u8; 4]
}

struct Ipv6Addr {
    octets: [u8; 16]
}
```

</details>

#### Vote
It's a validators vote on a fork. Contains a one byte index from vote tower (range 0 to 31) and vote transaction to execute by the leader.

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `index` | `u8` | 1 | vote tower index | 
| `from` | `[u8; 32]` | 32 | public key of the origin |
| `transaction`  | [`Transaction`](#transaction) | 59+ | a vote transaction, an atomically-committed sequence of instructions |
| `wallclock`  | `u64` | 8 |  wallclock of the node that generated that message |
| `slot`  | `u64` | 8 |  slot in which the vote was created |


##### Transaction
Contains a signature and a message with a sequence of instructions.

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `signature` | `[[u8; 64]]` | 8+ | list of signatures equal to `num_required_signatures` for the message |
| `message` | [`Message`](#message) | 51+ | transaction message containing instructions to invoke |



 ##### Message

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `header` | [`MessageHeader`](#message-header) | 3 | message header |
| `account_keys` | `[[u8; 32]]` | 8+ | all account keys used by this transaction |
| `recent_blockhash` | `[u8; 32]` | 32 |hash of a recent ledger entry |
| `instructions` | [`[CompiledInstruction]`](#compiled-instruction) | 8+ | list of compiled instructions to execute |

##### Message header

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `num_required_signatures` | `u8` | 1 | number of signatures required for this message to be considered valid |
| `num_readonly_signed_accounts` | `u8` | 1 | last `num_readonly_signed_accounts` of the signed keys are read-only accounts |
| `num_readonly_unsigned_accounts` | `u8` | 1 | last `num_readonly_unsigned_accounts` of the unsigned keys are read-only accounts |

##### Compiled instruction

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `program_id_index` | `u8` | 1 | index of the transaction keys array indicating the program account ID that executes the program |
| `accounts` |`[u8]` | 8+ | indices of the transaction keys array indicating the accounts that are passed to a program |
| `data` | `[u8]` | 8+ | program input data |

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

```rust
struct Vote {
    from: Pubkey,
    transaction: Transaction,
    wallclock: u64,
    slot: Option<Slot>,
}

type Slot = u64

struct Transaction {
    signature: Vec<Signature>,
    message: Message
}

struct Message {
    header: MessageHeader,
    account_keys: Vec<Pubkey>,
    recent_blockhash: Hash,
    instructions: Vec<CompiledInstruction>,
}

struct MessageHeader {
    num_required_signatures: u8,
    num_readonly_signed_accounts: u8,
    num_readonly_unsigned_accounts: u8,
}

struct CompiledInstruction {
    program_id_index: u8,
    accounts: Vec<u8>,
    data: Vec<u8>,
}
```
</details>

#### LowestSlot
It is the first available slot in Solana [blockstore][blockstore] that contains any data. Contains a one-byte index (deprecated) and the lowest slot number.

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `index` | `u8` | 1 | _deprecated_ | 
| `from` | `[u8; 32]`| 32 | public key of the origin |
| `root` | `u64` | 8 | _deprecated_ |
| `lowest` | `u64` | 8 | the actual slot |
| `slots` | `[u64]` | 8+ | _deprecated_ |
| `stash` | [`[EpochIncompleteSlots]`](#epochincompleteslots) | 8+ | _deprecated_ |
| `wallclock` | `u64` | 8 | wallclock of the node that generated that message |

##### EpochIncompleteSlots

| Data | Type | Size | Description |
|------|:----:|:----:|-------------|
| `first` | `u64` | 8 | first slot number | 
| `compression` | [`CompressionType`](#compressiontype) | 4 | compression type | 
| `compressed_list` | `[u8]` | 8+ | compressed slots list | 

##### CompressionType
Compression type enum.

| Data | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `Uncompressed` | uncompressed | 
| `GZip` | gzip | 
| `BZip2`| bzip2 | 

<details>
  <summary>Solana client Rust implementation</summary>

```rust
struct LowestSlot {
    from: Pubkey,
    root: Slot,
    lowest: Slot,
    slots: BTreeSet<Slot>,
    stash: Vec<EpochIncompleteSlots>,
    wallclock: u64,
}

struct EpochIncompleteSlots {
    first: Slot,
    compression: CompressionType,
    compressed_list: Vec<u8>,
}

enum CompressionType {
    Uncompressed,
    GZip,
    BZip2,
}
```
</details>


[bincode]: https://github.com/bincode-org/bincode/blob/trunk/docs/spec.md
[blockstore]: https://docs.solanalabs.com/validator/blockstore
